**Repository forked from https://github.com/duplisea/ccca**

**Reference: Duplisea, D. E., Roux, M.-J., Hunter, K. L., & Rice, J. 2021. Fish harvesting advice under climate change: A risk-equivalent empirical approach. PLOS ONE, 16(2), e0239503. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0239503**

CCCA model background
---------------------

The goal of the ccca package is to generate climate change conditioned
advice for fisheries. Based on data inputs of a survey index time
series, a catch time series and a climate change variable thought to
affect stock production, a simple model is derived. The approach is
emppirical in that it takes advantage of an empirically observed
relationship between a stock’s surplus production and environmental or
ecological variable even if the specific mechanism cannot be that well
articulated. That is, there should be a hypothesis relating the E
variables to surplus production but not necessarily an experimental body
of evidence that supports it. By relaxing the necessary basis for
evidence and casting this in a risk based framework, we are able to
provide climate conditioned advice more immediately. This model is
projected given climate scenarios that you provide using a built in
function. This is done by fitting a normal distribution to your climate
variable time series and then resamples it for a specified number of
years into the future and for the number of Monte Carlo projection runs
you want. You can shift the mean of this distribution or sample its
quantiles to to simulate climate change. The variance of this
distribution can also be altered to reflect the future climate scenario
in terms of variance and not just mean. You can also easily develop your
own scenario based on a different distribution, non-parametric
resampling of the climate series or say a directional change in the
climate variable, i.e. not a new stable state.

Various plotting functions are provided. You can find risk equivalent F
strategies for a climate change scenario versus your baseline scenario.
The contour plots show how the reference point risk changes with climate
change. You can also determine climate conditioning factors to multiply
the management tool (e.g. F, TAC) to condition the advice to climate
change induced productivty changes in the tock and a risk equivalent
fishing strategy.

The model was developed considering both density dependent and
independent stock dynamics which are not very different for commerically
exploited fish stocks.

### Development status

The is work that is presently under consideration for primary
literature. We please ask that you not try to publish other work based
on this until the primary publication is out (it will be cited below).
We are happy to take questions, comments and collaborate.

The case study
--------------

Gulf of St. Lawrence Greenland halibut also called turbot was used here
as a case study. This is cold water seeking species which in the Gulf
prefers depths &gt;200m. It is also a stock which seems to be
susceptible to relatively small changes in bottom water temperature and
the growth rate of the stock seems closely related to bottom water
temperature. This stock also has a good time series for the survey since
1990, landings and there are good temperature time series at relevant
depths for the stock. There also is not a model for the stock. The data
available for the stock is characterisitic for many Canadian fish and
invertebrate stocks and because it is without a model, we label the
situation as characteristic data moderate.

The objective, risk and time period
-----------------------------------

The objective considered here is a target objective. We setup a
reference period (1995-2000) as a period when catches were good,
relatively stable and the stock was healthy. Thus this is like a Bmsy
target. A relative exploitation rate reference was developed from the
same period. Because it is a target, by definition there is a 50% risk
level for not achieving the target. This is essentially saying that for
a target, the biomass will be above it 50% of the time and below it 50%
of the time. We also set a period of 10 years as the maximum allowable
time frame for achieving the objective which is largely a reflection of
the population growth capacity for this particular stock.

Other biomass objectives and risk levels could also be chosen. For
example a Blim might be represented by 40% of reference period biomass
but it would also be necessary to decrease the risk tolerance for
failure as well as the time period. So perhaps a risk level of 10% and
time period of 5 years would be more appopriate for such an objective.

Installation
------------

    library(devtools)
    install_github("duplisea/ccca")

Setting up a base case P/B model fitting projection simulation
--------------------------------------------------------------

    library(ccca)

Run the basic model fit and projection simulation
-------------------------------------------------

A default parameters file (params) comes with the package. It is a list
with options needed to fit the P/B model and run projections. The mapply
step just moves each list object into the global environment rather than
calling the list element each time in Monte Carlo simulations so it is
faster and it also does not alter the base parameterisation in the list
so you can return to it later.

    data(params)
    mapply(assign, names(params), params, MoreArgs=list(envir = globalenv()))

Determine the annual P/B ratio of the population creating a dataframe
with the index bumped by q

    PB= PB.f(turbot, ref.years=ref.years, q=q)

Fit a relationship between the P/B and the E variable according to what
you selected in params

    PvsE= PBE.fit.f(PB,model.type=model.type, knots=knots, poly.degree=poly.degree)

Fit a normal distribution to the E time series and pull the parameters
out.

    Enorm= norm.fit.f(E=PB$E)
    Edist.a=Enorm$estimate[1]
    Edist.b=Enorm$estimate[2]

Develop the E projection values based on your choice of projection
parameters

    Eproj= Eprojnorm.f(Edist.a=Edist.a, Edist.b=Edist.b, Emean.shift=Emean.shift, proj.years=proj.years, N)

Develop the PB projection values based on the P/B vs E fit and the E
projection you specified above. When add.residuals=1 then a residual is
sampled for each time step of each projection and is added to the P/B
values. If the P/B vs E fit is relatively unbiased then it will not make
much difference to the median but it will increase the future
uncertainty. If you set it =0 then the residual is not added and you
will have less uncertainty in the future. If the P/B vs E model is
biased, this bias will be more likely to be carried forward if residuals
are not sampled (=0).

    PBproj= PB.for.projection.f(PvsE=PvsE,Eproj,add.residuals=add.resids)

The fishing strategy. In this case is the the mean exploitation (Index
corrected by catchability) during the last five years.

    Fstrat= F.strategy(PB, 2014:2018, moratorium=F)

Run the projection given all the above calculations and parameters. The
trajectory over the projection period and the probability that B is
greater than the objective after the specified time range.

    Bproj= projection.f(PB=PB, Bstart.mult=Bstart.mult, PBproj=PBproj, Fstrat, K=K, theta=1)
    Fout= Fseq.f(PB,PBproj=PBproj,Fseq=fs,time.frame=time.frame, N=N, K=K)
    PofF= PofF.f(PB,Fout,ref.pt=ref.pt)

Summarises the output of the projections by calculating quantiles and
putting results in a dataframe. Calculates the probability of being at
or above a reference point.

    Bproj.summary= Bproj.summary.f(PB,Bproj,PBproj,Eproj)
    P= rankprob.f(Bproj,PB,ref.pt)

We have done all of the above again but for different climate scenario
mean shift, one warm and one cold, one with status quo mean temperature
but increased variance and finally a null model run where P/B does not
depend on E. It is not shown here but you do it by modifying the
Emean.shift and Evariance parameters and re-running the above steps.
These projection objects have names warm, cold, E.var.inc to distinguish
them from the base run and they appear in the figures

Run mutliple simulations for each combination of E scenario and F. First
the E and PB scenarios are set up and then multiple projections are made
based on the exploitation rate series specified in the parameters file.

    ECCF= Eproj.list.f(Emean.shifts=Emean.shifts, N=N.CCF, proj.years=proj.years, Edist.a=Edist.a,
      Edist.b=Edist.b)
    PBCCF= PBproj.list.f(PvsE=PvsE, Eprojection=ECCF)
    CCF.raw= P.R.for.EF.f(E.CCF=ECCF, PB.CCF=PBCCF, Fs=fs, PB=PB, ref.pt=ref.pt, Bstart.mult=Bstart.mult,
      K=K, theta=theta)

Plots of the data and projections
---------------------------------

The plot of the Gulf of St Lawrence showing the main fishing areas for
turbot ![Figure 1: Map of the Gulf of St Lawrence showing the main
turbot fishing areas.](README_files/figure-markdown_strict/map-1.png)

The basic data time series for the index, catch and E variable ![Figure
2: the basic inputs to the P/B
model.](README_files/figure-markdown_strict/inputs-1.png)

The Kobe plot of the historical data with the E variable colour coded on
top of the points. There is function called Kobe.f to do this.

    Kobe.f(PB=PB,E=PB$E)
    colramp.legend(col1="red", col2="blue", ncol=length(PB$E), 2.5, 3.5, 2.7, 4.5)

![Figure 3: a Kobe plot of biomass relative to the reference period
(1995-2000) biomass and the relative exploitation rate in the reference
period. The water temperature at 250 m is colour coded on top
(blue-red:cold-warm).](README_files/figure-markdown_strict/kobe-1.png)

The P/B vs E data plot and fitted model. ![Figure 4: The relationship
between the stock P/B ratio and the environmental variable (temperature
at 250 m) with an adaptive GAM model fitted to the
relationship.](README_files/figure-markdown_strict/pvseplot-1.png)

The normal distrubtion fitted to the E series which is sampled for
future climate projections altering the mean and variance for different
climate scenarios. ![Figure 5: The distributions of temperature used for
projection scenarios. Black is the baseline where the distribution was
fitted to all years; red is shift in the mean 0.5 C warmer than the
baseline; blue line is 0.5 C colder than the baseline; green line has
the same mean as the baseline but a 50% increase in standard
deviation.](README_files/figure-markdown_strict/gammaplot-1.png)

The distribution of the P/B values for the future projections. It is the
P/B that results by sampling E distribution function to simulate a
future climate and while altering the mean and variance if desired. The
P/B distribution is then deermined by running sampled E value through
the fitted P/B vs E relationship. ![Figure 6: the P/B distributions used
in projections for the different climate scenarios. Black is the
baseline where the temperature distribution was fitted to all years; red
is shift in the mean 0.5 C warmer than the baseline; blue line is 0.5 C
colder than the baseline; green line has the same mean as the baseline
but a 50% increase in standard
deviation](README_files/figure-markdown_strict/PBprojplot-1.png)

The plot of the projection given your E scenario for both density
independent and dependent models. The biomass reference level is
depicted as the horizontal dashed line. Confidence intervals are 90%.
![Figure 7: the projection of the baseline temperature scenario. Status
quo exploitation rate (mean 2014-2018) was
assumed.](README_files/figure-markdown_strict/projplotbase-1.png)

What is clear from the projections is that a decrease in temperature
from the baseline is not good for the stock while an increase in
temperature is certainly not good. What is more surprising is that even
if mean temperature is the same as the baseline but there is an
important increase in variance of the temperature, this is perhaps the
worst case for the stock. There is a larger perentage of the P/B density
&lt;0 for the increased variance scenario than for any other scenario
(Fig. 6).
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

The probability that the biomass is greater than the reference level
each year of the projection. The horizontal dashed line represents the
risk tolerance of not achieving the objective. i.e. For the objective to
be met, the biomass line should be above the risk line at the end of the
time.frame period specified in the parameters list. ![Figure 8: the
probability of achieving the objective each year during a 10 year
projection of the status quo fishing rate and baseline temperature
scenario.](README_files/figure-markdown_strict/PgtBrefplot-1.png)

The maximum exploitation rate that will achieve the objective in the
specified time period given the E scenario projected.

![Figure 9: The maximum exploitation rate that would allow the stock to
achieve the objective in the specified period of time at the specified
risk level for density independent and density dependent models and the
baseline temperature
scenario.](README_files/figure-markdown_strict/Fvalsbase-1.png)

![Figure 10: a contour plot showing the probability of achieveing the
objective in the specified time period under different exploitatin rates
and future temperature scenarios for the density independent model. The
actual time series of temperature an exploitation rate is shown as the
blue line
overlay.](README_files/figure-markdown_strict/contplot.di-1.png)

Climate conditioning factors and deriving risk based advice
-----------------------------------------------------------

You can determine climate conditioning buffer factors from the contour
plot (Fig 10) for the particular objective. So if the acceptable risk
level is 50% (a target) then one can follow the 0.5 contour to see what
the maximum exploitation rate could be for various future temperatures.
The buffering factor would be the ratio of the long term mean
temperature exploitation on the 50% risk contour with that at the
proposed future temperature. The buffering factor is the incremental
risk buffer. If one were interested in incremental risk of status quo
fishing then they would plot the exploitation rate of long term mean
temperature and status quo exploitation and determine on what risk
contour it landed. Then do the same with the hypothesised future median
temperature and status quo exploitation rate. The difference between the
two risk levels is the incremental risk.

Incremental risk of assuming turbot production is affected by climate
change vs not being affected can also be calculated by looking at how
much the exploitation rate would need to change under one of the climate
scenarios vs the null model. This incremental risk is the risk of
assuming climate change is not important given your objective and future
climate scenario.

The contour plot and climate conditioning factors essentially show the
dependence of reference points on the environmental conditions. Ideally
a reference point is relatively invariant to external factors but the
reality is that none are. The domed contours over the temperature
dimension esssentially show degree of variance caused by change in the
environment and climate change in what are essentially dynamic reference
points.

Acknowledgements
================

The DFO peer review group provided considerable feedback on these
simulations. Mariano Koen-Alonso suggested that density dependence
should be considered in these simulations.

Johanne Gauthier provided the turbot data and several temperature time
series relevant to the turbot survey catches. Peter Galbraith provided
several temperature and salinity E variables available in the turbot
data object. Denis Gilbert provided the oxygen concentration and
saturation levels for the deep water (&gt;295 m) of the St Lawrence
estuary.

References
==========

DFO. 2018. Assessment of the Greenland Halibut stock in the Gulf of
St. Lawrence (4RST) in 2017. DFO Can. Sci. Advis. Sec. Sci. Advis.
Rep. 2018/035.
<a href="http://waves-vagues.dfo-mpo.gc.ca/Library/40714007.pdf" class="uri">http://waves-vagues.dfo-mpo.gc.ca/Library/40714007.pdf</a>

Duplisea, D.E., Roux, M-J., Hunter, K.L. and Rice, J. 2019. Resource
management under climate change: a risk-based strategy to develop
climate-informed science advice. Can. Sci. Advis. Sec. Res. Doc.
2019/044.
<a href="http://www.dfo-mpo.gc.ca/csas-sccs/Publications/ResDocs-DocRech/2019/2019_044-eng.html" class="uri">http://www.dfo-mpo.gc.ca/csas-sccs/Publications/ResDocs-DocRech/2019/2019_044-eng.html</a>

Galbraith, P.S., Chassé, J., Nicot, P., Caverhill, C., Gilbert, D.,
Pettigrew, B., Lefaivre, D., Brickman, D., Devine, L., and Lafleur, C.
2015. Physical Oceanographic Conditions in the Gulf of St. Lawrence in
2014. DFO Can. Sci. Advis. Sec. Res. Doc. 2015/032. v + 82 p
<a href="http://www.dfo-mpo.gc.ca/csas-sccs/Publications/ResDocs-DocRech/2015/2015_032-eng.html" class="uri">http://www.dfo-mpo.gc.ca/csas-sccs/Publications/ResDocs-DocRech/2015/2015_032-eng.html</a>

Gilbert, D., B. Sundby, C. Gobeil, A. Mucci, G.-H. Tremblay 2005. A
seventy-two-year record of diminishing deep-water oxygen in the
St. Lawrence estuary: The northwest Atlantic connection. Limnology and
Oceanography. 50: 1654-1666.
